Let's go test a custom hook.
Part of the reasons writing
custom hooks is great is because
they become individually testable.
Whereas if it's just like an effect
in the middle of a component,
it's really hard to test that.
So we have useBreedList here,
so the old way of writing these
kind of tests with useBreedList and
things like that, you actually have
to like fake the component, right?
And I can show you how to do that
really quick if you want to.
Let's just do it.
Right, create a new file here,
we're gonna call it useBreedList.test.jsx.
This one actually has to be JSX
because we're gonna write JSX in it.
All right, so import ( expect,
test ) from 'vitest'.
import ( render ) from our
testing library/react.
import (queryClient,
QueryClientProvider) from
@tanstack/react-query.
And import finally,
usebreedList from '../usebreedList'.
We're gonna have to make our default
query client here really quick.
const query client,
this is just like a React router dom where
React query requires to have a query
client and a query client provider.
So we have to kind of fake that for it.
So queryClient is
basically gonna be exactly
what we do in our app.jsx
= new QueryClient.
defaultOptions, queries, staleTime,
Infinity, cacheTime, Infinity,
we are gonna add one more thing to it,
which is retry: false.
By default, React query will try
three times and then give up,
we don't want that in our test.
If we're testing, if it fails, we want it
to just fail, we don't want it to retry.
Okay, function, we're gonna write
this function called getBreedList.
And it's gonna take an animal.
We have this problem we're
testing reacthooks.hooks,
it only works inside of
a React component so
how can we test,
we use breed list outside of a component?
To answer your question, you can not,
it only works inside of a React component,
so we are going to make a React component.
So we're gonna say let list, and
then we're gonna read write function
TestComponent and say list is assigned,
useBreedList(animal) and then return null.
It's kind of cheating, right?
This is technically a valid
React component, right?
And then all we gotta
have to do is render it.
So we're gonna say render,
queryClientProvider,
client is assigned queryClient and
then we're just going to
render a test component.
Right, this is gonna go through all the
lifecycle, it's gonna call useBreedList,
and then it's going to save the list here.
So then all we have to do
down here is return list.
Kind of silly, right?
It's a bit of like
sacrificing the right goat.
But now that we've done all this,
we can write a little test down here.
gives an empty list with no animal
provided, async function.
Okay, and then all we have to
say is const breedList and
status = getBreedList with nothing, right?
And then we're gonna say
expect(breedList).toHaveLength(0).
expect(status).toBe of loading,
I don't remember what
the status is supposed to be, but
loading sounds appropriate to me.
Lo and behold, it works, right?
If I say 1 here, it's gonna crash.
If I say 0, it's gonna work.
We had to write 37 lines of code to test,
eighth.grade, it's a pretty simple hook.
And once you write something like this,
you can test any hook this way, right?
And this is how we used to have
to write things like this.
Luckily, now with testing library,
you can actually get something out of it.
That allows you to test hooks directly
without having to do all this faking
stuff.
So let's try giving that a shot.
So we're going to expect in tests render,
we got that, queryCient,
queryClientProvider, we
need all of this stuff.
You do need the queryClient, you can
delete all this get brainless stuff.
Okay, and then instead of doing it,
we'll just rewrite this test totally.
Now we can say const (result)
is assigned renderHook.
We got renderHook from testing library,
so instead of render, we want renderHook,
this is relatively new, this is new
since I last taught the course, I think.
And you just give it a function
of what you're trying to
get out right, so
this is all we're gonna need for that.
And then we do have to give it a wrapper,
right?
So this is gonna be
a function with children
And this is where we can give
it QueryClientProvider with
a queryClient is assigned.
queryClient.
And you just give it children
in the middle of that there.
Okay, all of this rigmarole
will end up with result and
result will be whatever you
expected back from the hook.
So now I can say const (breedList,
status) is assigned result.current.
And I can say expect
(breedList).toHaveLength0,
toHaveLength0, and
expect(status).toBeLoading.
So all right, we fail, what happened here?
No query client set, did I not set that?
Did you install a dependency?
>> For the render hook?
>> Yeah.
>> No.
So it's actually,
it's built into testing library React now.
>> You didn't have to install
testing library/reacthooks.
>> That is the old one,
that one does not work with React 18.
That is what version seven of
this course used to teach.
useBreedList, no query, client sets.
So, that's the part that I don't
know why it's not unhappy about,
because it is, it there.
queryClientProvider, queryClient,
queryClient.
It's not queryClient,
sorry it's just client.
Here we go, sorry.
So I had here on line 19,
I had queryClient like this,
it's not queryClient, it is just client.
And that's all I needed, good.